Migrate managing-dependencies guide (#1185)
astronomer/docs: guides/managing-dependencies.md

---
title: "Manage Apache Airflow dependencies"
sidebar_label: "Manage Apache Airflow dependencies"
description: "An overview of Airflow dependencies and triggers."
id: managing-dependencies
---

[Dependencies](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/tasks.html#relationships) are a powerful and popular Airflow feature. In Airflow, your pipelines are defined as Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). Each task is a node in the graph and dependencies are the directed edges that determine how to move through the graph. Because of this, dependencies are key to following data engineering best practices because they help you define flexible pipelines with atomic tasks.

Throughout this guide, the following terms are used to describe task dependencies:

> - Upstream task: A task that must reach a specified state before a dependent task can run.
> - Downstream task: A dependent task that cannot run until an upstream task reaches a specified state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Upstream task**: A task that must reach a specified state before a dependent task can run.
- **Downstream task**: A dependent task that cannot run until an upstream task reaches a specified state.
```

In this guide you'll learn about the many ways you can implement dependencies in Airflow, including:

> - Basic task dependencies
> - Dynamic dependencies
> - Dependencies with Task Groups
> - Dependencies with the TaskFlow API
> - Trigger rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Basic task dependencies.
- Dynamic dependencies.
- Dependencies with task groups.
- Dependencies with the TaskFlow API.
- Trigger rules.
```

To view a video presentation of these concepts, see [Manage Dependencies Between Airflow Deployments, DAGs, and Tasks](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/manage-dependencies-between-airflow-deployments-dags-tasks/). 

> The focus of this guide is dependencies between tasks in the same DAG. If you need to implement dependencies between DAGs, see [Cross-DAG Dependencies](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/cross-dag-dependencies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The focus of this guide is dependencies between tasks in the same DAG. If you need to implement dependencies between DAGs, see [Cross-DAG dependencies](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/cross-dag-dependencies).
```

## Basic dependencies

Basic dependencies between Airflow tasks can be set in the following ways:

- Using bitshift operators (`<<` and `>>`)
- Using the `set_upstream` and `set_downstream` methods

For example, if you have a DAG with four sequential tasks, the dependencies can be set in four ways:

- Using `set_downstream()`:

    ```python
    t0.set_downstream(t1)
    t1.set_downstream(t2)
    t2.set_downstream(t3)
    ```

- Using `set_upstream()`:

    ```python
    t3.set_upstream(t2)
    t2.set_upstream(t1)
    t1.set_upstream(t0)
    ```

- Using `>>`

    ```python
    t0 >> t1 >> t2 >> t3
    ```

- Using `<<`

    ```python
    t3 << t2 << t1 << t0
    ```

All of these methods are equivalent and result in the DAG shown in the following image:

![Basic Dependencies](/img/guides/basic_dependencies.png)

> Astronomer recommends using a single method consistently. For example, using both bitshift operators and `set_upstream`/`set_downstream` in your DAGs can overly-complicate your code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends using a single method consistently. Using both bitshift operators and `set_upstream`/`set_downstream` in your DAGs can overly-complicate your code. 
```

> You use lists or tuples to set a parallel dependency where two downstream tasks are dependent on the same upstream task. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set a dependency where two downstream tasks are dependent on the same upstream task, use lists or tuples. For example:
```

```python
# Dependencies with lists
t0 >> t1 >> [t2, t3]

# Dependencies with tuples
t0 >> t1 >> (t2, t3)
```

These statements are equivalent and result in the DAG shown in the following image: 

![List Dependencies](/img/guides/list_dependencies.png)

> Airflow can't parse dependencies between two lists. For example, `[t0, t1] >> [t2, t3]` returns an error. To set dependencies, you use the Airflow [`chain` function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/models/baseoperator.py#L1650). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow can't parse dependencies between two lists. For example, `[t0, t1] >> [t2, t3]` returns an error. To set these dependencies, use the Airflow [`chain` function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/models/baseoperator.py#L1650). For example:
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.dummy_operator import DummyOperator
from airflow.models.baseoperator import chain

with DAG('dependencies',
         ) as dag:

    t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='t0')
    t1 = DummyOperator(task_id='t1')
    t2 = DummyOperator(task_id='t2')
    t3 = DummyOperator(task_id='t3')
    t4 = DummyOperator(task_id='t4')
    t5 = DummyOperator(task_id='t5')
    t6 = DummyOperator(task_id='t6')

    chain(t0, t1, [t2, t3], [t4, t5], t6)
```

This image shows the resulting DAG:

![Chain Dependencies](/img/guides/chain.png)

With the `chain` function, any lists or tuples you include must be of the same length.

## Dynamic dependencies

If you generate tasks dynamically in your DAG, you should define the dependencies within the context of the code used to dynamically create the tasks.

> In the following example, a set of parallel dynamic tasks is generated by looping through a list of endpoints. You define the dependencies within the loop, which means every `generate_file` task is downstream of `start` and upstream of `send_email`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, a set of parallel dynamic tasks is generated by looping through a list of endpoints. Each `generate_files` task is downstream of `start` and upstream of `send_email`.
```

When working with task groups, it is important to note that dependencies can be set both inside and outside of the group. For example, in the following DAG code there is a start task, a task group with two dependent tasks, and an end task that needs to happen sequentially. The dependencies between the two tasks in the task group are set within the task group's context (`t1 >> t2`). The dependencies between the task group and the start and end tasks are set within the DAG's context (`t0 >> tg1 >> t3`).

```python
t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='start')

# Start Task Group definition
with TaskGroup(group_id='group1') as tg1:
    t1 = DummyOperator(task_id='task1')
    t2 = DummyOperator(task_id='task2')

    t1 >> t2
# End Task Group definition
    
t3 = DummyOperator(task_id='end')

# Set Task Group's (tg1) dependencies
t0 >> tg1 >> t3
```

This image shows the resulting DAG:

![Task Group Dependencies](/img/guides/task_group.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## TaskFlow API dependencies

The [TaskFlow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/taskflow.html), available in Airflow 2.0 and later, lets you turn Python functions into Airflow tasks using the `@task` decorator. 

> If your DAG has only Python functions that are all defined with the decorator, you invoke Python functions to set dependencies. For example, in the following DAG there are two dependent tasks, `get_testing_increases` and `analyze_testing_increases`. To set the dependencies, you invoke the function `analyze_testing_increases(get_testing_increase(state))`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your DAG has only Python functions that are all defined with the decorator, invoke Python functions to set dependencies. For example, in the following DAG there are two dependent tasks, `get_testing_increases` and `analyze_testing_increases`. To set the dependencies, you invoke the function `analyze_testing_increases(get_testing_increase(state))`:
```
